>> Namaste.
Welcome to "Thrive,
Self-Healing with Ayurveda."
I'm Justine Lemos, an Ayurvedic
practitioner and yoga teacher.
We'll begin our practice
in Vajrapradama Mudra.
We take our fingertips and
lightly intertwine them,
and place this formation
across the heart.
This Mudra is a gesture or
seal of unshakable trust.
It grounds our nervous
system, or what
we call Prana Vata
or Prana Vayu, back
into the space of our heart.
So just place this
formation across the heart.
Allow yourself to
close your eyes.
Rest into an awareness
of your breath.
And ground into the unshakable
trust that is always
present at your heart.
And gently release
the fingertips.
Inhale, drawing the arms upward.
Exhale, bring them to your
heart's space in Anjali Mudra.
We'll chant Om
together one time.
Exhaling out completely.
Inhaling deeply to begin.
Om.
Welcome to your practice.
Let's come down together into
Balasana, or Child's Pose.
Taking your big toes
together and knees apart.
Resting the forehead just right
at the center of the forehead,
the Ajna Chakra, onto the mat.
Allow yourself to
rest into your breath.
Breathing into the back
and the front of the heart.
Coming up onto the
hands and knees.
Stacking your hips right
on top of the knees.
Place the right hand down.
Inhale from here as you exhale.
Slide the left arm
through palm up.
Draw up onto the
right fingertips.
Hollow the lower belly.
Place the left cheek
down onto the mat.
If the temple doesn't
reach down to the mat,
you can always place
a block underneath it.
Reach the right arm up.
The back of the hand
comes to the sacrum,
or all the way around
to the left inner thigh.
This posture, as do many
in our sequence today,
work on the heart
and lung meridians.
And in this way, we'll
bring the nervous system
back down from out in the
ethers into the spaciousness
of the heart.
The true home of
our nervous system.
And from there, we can
blossom forth into compassion.
Moving out of stress and anxiety
into deep heart-felt love
and joy.
Other side, placing the
left hand down on the mat.
Take the right arm.
Swim it through palm up,
placing the right temple down
onto the mat.
Up onto the left fingertips.
Hollow through the lower belly.
Slide the right arm through.
Connect with your breath.
Inhale.
Take the left arm
up towards the sky.
Rotate.
Placing the back of
the hand to the sacrum,
all the way around to
the right inner thigh.
Inhaling from here.
Exhale.
Release.
Walk your hands out slightly
in front of your shoulders.
This creation of the
Hasta Bandha of the hands
also ignites the heart meridian,
the pericardium meridian.
Tuck your toes under.
Lift through the lower belly.
Inhale from here.
Exhale.
Lengthen up into Adho Mukha
Svanasana, Downward Facing Dog.
Rest here in an
awareness of your breath.
Widening through the scapula.
Allowing the arm
pits to yawn open.
Inhale.
Look forward.
Slowly walk your feet
up underneath your hips
as if flowers would
blossom under each step.
Lengthen down over your legs.
If you need to, you can place
a block underneath the hands.
You can always bend your knees.
Roll your inner thighs in.
Take your fingertips to
the mat or to your shins.
Inhale.
Expand up.
Ardha Uttanasana.
Feeling this light expand
at the heart space.
Exhale.
Release down over the legs.
Two more times with
your breath inhaling up.
Exhaling.
Lengthening down and over.
Last time.
Inhaling up halfway.
Exhale.
Releasing down over the legs.
Inhale.
Lengthen all the
way up to standing.
Exhale.
Taking your hands down by
your sides in Tadasana.
Turn and face
sideways on the mat.
Ground into your feet.
We'll take Prana Mudra
practice, which is almost
like yogic Tai chi or Qigong.
Simply inhale.
Drawing your arms up.
Feeling your lungs expand.
The sides of the waist lengthen.
Exhaling down.
Grounding into the feet.
Inhaling up.
Exhaling down.
Then one more cycle.
Inhaling up.
And exhaling down.
This time inhaling the arms up.
Rotate the palms down
and exhale down as
if you feel your head
lifting up above the clouds.
Feeling your energy ground
back down into the earth.
So we're bringing
the nervous system,
which can get up and
out of ourselves, back
down into its home in
our body, and especially
into the space of our heart.
Inhaling up and out.
Exhaling down the midline.
Down the central
channel of the body.
And now continuing to open the
side waist, inhale the arms up.
Rotate the left hand forward.
We'll touch together
the middle finger
to the thumb in Hridaya Mudra.
This Mudra relates to
the space of the heart.
Open through the arm pits.
Inhale from here.
Exhale.
Lengthen to the right side.
Feel this small amount of
spaciousness at the heart.
So the heart is illuminating
and shining bright.
Inhaling up with your breath.
Exhale the arms down.
Inhale.
Expand up.
Rotate the right hand forward.
Touch together the middle
finger to the thumb.
Left hand around the wrist.
Inhale from here.
Exhaling over.
Feeling the heads of the humerus
root down into the shoulders.
Inhale up.
Exhale down.
Take your feet out wide.
Rotating out from the hips.
Bend the knees over the
midline of the feet.
Take your palms,
rub them together.
So stimulating
this heart meridian
point at the center of the palm.
Place the palms to the
inside of the thighs.
Then inhale low
under the tongue.
We'll come out eyes open.
Inhale.
Roll under.
My guru also always says,
exhale tongue out, eyes open.
That this prevents wrinkles.
So added bonus.
Inhale.
Roll under.
Exhale out.
And straighten
through the knees.
Rotate the right toes in.
Lengthen out through
the left leg.
Square off through the hips.
Breathe into the back
space of the body.
We'll come into Trikonasana.
Triangle Pose.
Inhale from here.
Lengthen through the
sides of the waist.
Exhale out to the left side.
You can bring the left hand
down to the ankle, to the mat,
or to a block.
Press into the back right heel.
Bring the right arm forward.
Pull the head of
the humerus back
into the socket and then inhale.
Lengthening up.
Inhale from here.
Right hand to the hip.
Bend the left knee over the
midline of the left foot.
Left forearm to the thigh.
Draw the left shoulder back.
Touch together, again, the
middle finger to the thumb
in this Hridaya Mudra.
So activating the
energy of the heart.
Drawing the nervous
system back down
into the space of the heart.
Reach the right arm forward.
Pull the head of
the humerus back.
Lower belly hollowed.
Right inner thigh rolling in.
Draw the arm all
the way by the ear.
Inhale from here.
Draw the right hand to the hip.
Left hand to the hip.
Straighten out
through the left knee.
Roll the left toes in.
Roll the right toes out.
We'll come in to
Trikonasana, Triangle Pose,
on the other side.
Lengthen out through the arms.
Inhale from here into
the back of the body.
Lengthen out through
the right side.
Inhale.
As you exhale, right
hand down to the ankle.
You can also go to the
block, or even the thigh.
Reach the left arm forward.
Draw the head of
the humerus back.
Inhaling, the left arm up.
Pressing into the
back left heel.
Inhale from here.
Left hand to the hip.
Bend the right knee over the
midline of the right foot.
Right forearm to the thigh.
Thumb to the middle finger
in this Hridaya Mudra.
Hollow through the lower belly.
Roll the left inner thigh in.
Left arm lengthens out.
Head of the humerus
back into the socket.
Rotate the pinky finger down.
Inhale from here.
Feel yourself grounded
through the feet
and simultaneously expansive
through the heart space.
Left hand to the hip.
Inhale.
Straighten out through
the right knee.
Roll the right toes in.
Draw the feet back up
underneath the hips.
Inhale.
Take the arms up.
Exhale.
Bring the hands back to Anjali
Mudra at your heart space.
Standing forward at
the front of the mat,
roll down through the spine,
one vertebra at a time.
Take the legs out behind you
into a high plank momentarily.
Then take your knees down,
your chin and your chest
down to the mat
into Ashtanjasana.
Draw the elbows back.
Place the backs of the
feet down onto the mat.
Pubic bone down onto the mat.
Then the forehead.
The very center of the
forehead, the Ajna Chakra
comes down to the mat.
Hands together
into a full Pranam.
Then here, swimming your
arms back around behind you.
Clasp the hands.
Draw the shoulders,
looping them down the back.
Lengthen through the legs.
Rolling the inner thighs.
Lift the legs up
off the mat, feeling
the lower belly engage up and
in the transverse abdominus.
Then inhale.
Lift up and out through
the space of the heart
into Salabhasana.
Exhale.
Releasing down.
Placing the palms
underneath the forehead.
Big toes together.
Heels apart.
Makrasana.
So feeling the forehead
connect to the earth
allows us to tame and
soothe the nervous system.
Bringing your hands back
underneath the shoulders.
Inhale from here.
Exhale.
Release to Child's
Pose, Balasana.
Arms forward or palms
up by the hips are fine.
Then roll up through the
spine onto the knees.
If this isn't uncomfortable,
you can always
place a block underneath
the sitz bones
or sit in another
comfortable position.
We'll practice Hridaya
Marma practice.
The Marma point is
a vital point much
like the acupressure points
used in Chinese medicine.
And this Hridaya Marma is just
at the space of the heart.
We'll place the right hand
on top of the heart space.
The left hand on top of that.
And then we'll massage the whole
heart space with open hands.
Warming the heart
and this stimulation
of the space of the
heart releases oxytocin
into the bloodstream just
making us feel wonderful.
Making our heart center
expand so that we come out
of the turbulence of our
nervous system, which
can be afflicted with anxiety
into the grounded space
of our heart.
You can let the hands,
again, rest across the heart
or bring them back to
this Vajrapradama Mudra,
this gesture of
unshakable trust.
Placing it across the heart and
resting back into your breath.
Releasing this Mudra, we'll come
back onto our hands and knees,
or into our Downward
Facing Dog, whichever
feels better for you right now.
We'll move into Eka
Pada Rajakapotasana.
A Pigeon Pose.
Drawing the left knee forward,
rotating out from the hip.
Come up onto the right toes.
You can always place
a block or a blanket
underneath this left hip.
Roll the right toes under.
Roll the right
hip point forward.
Take the tailbone down as you
lift through the lower belly.
And then from this
very grounded stance,
allow the heart center to exalt.
So the expansion
of the heart space
emerges out of the
strong and stable root.
Take a breath here.
Then take your fingertips
down to the mat.
Release your back right toes.
Roll the right
hip point forward.
And then we'll bring
our forehead all the way
to the mat.
If the forehead
doesn't reach the mat,
you can always place a block
underneath the forehead.
So forehead down.
If you like to, palms together.
Resting here, allowing
the hips to open.
Then placing your hands
underneath your shoulders.
Tucking the right toes under.
Coming back on to
the hands and knees.
Or back to your
Downward Facing Dog.
Inhaling from here and drawing
your right knee forward.
Rotating out from the hip.
Draw the left toes under.
Roll this right hip point back.
You can always place
a block or a blanket
underneath the right hip.
Then from here, this very
grounded space, inhaling.
Expanding up through the heart.
Rolling the left
ribcage forward.
And then surrendering
down and in.
Releasing the back left toes.
Lengthening forward.
Forehead down on the
mat or on to a block.
And then hands
underneath the shoulders.
Draw yourself back onto
the hands and knees.
We'll go through the hips.
From here into a
Downward Facing Dog.
We'll move through stages
of a heart-opening posture
from a very grounded
and stable place.
Inhale.
Your right leg up
towards the sky.
Roll your right inner
thigh in and up.
Bring the right foot all the
way to the pinky-finger edge
of the right hand.
If you need to, grab
the ankle and pull it
through so the knee is
right underneath the heel.
Place your left knee
down onto the mat.
Tuck to the left toes.
Hollow through your low belly.
And then open through
the inner groin.
Take this left hand out.
Up onto the fingertips.
Or if it feels appropriate,
down on the left elbow.
Rotate out through
the right toes
so you see this right thigh
rotating back over the knee.
Then here, inhale.
Draw the right arm up towards
the sky or all the way
by the ear, if you like to.
Touching together the
thumb and the middle finger
to find this very grounded
activation of the heart.
Releasing the fingertips
down to the mat.
Draw this right foot
back to meet the left
into Downward Facing Dog.
And we'll take the other side.
Always moving in
a way that feels
comfortable for your body.
Inhale.
Draw the left leg up.
Roll the left inner
thigh in and up.
Deep exhalation as
you draw the left foot
to the pinky-finger
edge of the left hand.
Or grab the ankle,
draw it through.
Right knee down onto the mat.
Lift up onto the fingertips.
Hollow through the
lower belly then
open through the inner groin.
Rotate out onto the
right fingertips.
Or if it feels comfortable,
down onto the right elbow.
Left toes can rotate out.
Roll the left hip back.
Feel the strength drawing
up from the lower belly
so the expansion of the
heart is still grounded.
Feeling the side waist open.
Place the left hand
down onto the mat.
The right hand
Left foot meets the right.
Draw back to a
Downward Facing Dog.
Then knees come down to the mat.
Chest down onto the thighs.
Again, resting the forehead on
the mat to ground and soothe.
Inhale.
Roll up through the spine.
We're going to come down
onto our backs with a block.
Coming down onto our backs.
Placing our feet
down 4 to 6 inches
in front of our sitz bones.
Big toes come slightly
inside of the heels.
Inhale.
Draw your hips up.
Place a block on any comfortable
setting underneath the sacrum
and gently adjust your
scapula in towards each other.
Rotating the palms up.
If you like to, you
can bring your thumb
to the middle finger, again,
in that Hridaya Mudra.
If it's not comfortable,
just palms up.
Resting here.
Now if you have glaucoma
and endometriosis
or are menstruating, just stay
right here in this Bridge Pose.
This is probably enough.
Or if it feels comfortable,
you'll draw your feet up.
Then take your legs
up towards the sky
into a very gentle
Viparitakarani Mudra.
And this balances
all of the Chakras
and the endocrine system.
We can also lift the
tip of the tongue
all the way up to the soft
palate of the mouth here.
And this creates a flow of Ojas,
or a vital energy, in the body.
And then placing your feet
back down onto the mat.
Resting back into
your Bridge Pose.
Rotate your palms down.
Lift your sacrum
up off the block.
Slide the block out
from underneath you.
Roll back down through the
spine, one vertebra at a time.
Knees into the chest,
rocking side to side.
Roll over onto your right side.
Place your hands down and
make your way up to seated.
Two more very grounding
asana to ground and nurture
this Ajna Chakra where
the nervous system can
start to move up and out.
We're going to draw
it back down and in.
Soles of the feet together.
Knees apart.
About a foot and a half
away from your pubic bone.
Now if you like to, you
can take a block here.
You can also place a
bolster across the feet.
But what we'd like to
do is find somewhere
where we can rest the thumbs
or the fists on the forehead.
So that may mean that you
need to prop yourself up
quite high, which is just
fine, so that you can
rest the forehead even here.
Or you may be lower.
Just working to your capacity.
Whatever feels good to you.
We're going to release
the forehead down.
Taking a few long
deep breaths here.
And rolling up
through the spine.
We'll take the legs out wide.
Same thing here.
We can place a
bolster or blocks.
Or our elbows down.
Our elbows down can
also go on to a block
or bolsters so that we have
some contact, if possible,
with the Ajna Chakra.
Flexing the feet.
Rolling the thighs backwards
and lengthening down and in.
Allowing yourself to
release into this posture.
Then rolling up through the
spine, one vertebra at a time.
Draw the legs back together and
come back down onto your back.
We'll just take a twist before
we come into our Savasana.
Draw the arms out in a
comfortable t-shape, or cactus
shape, from the shoulders.
Inhale from here as you exhale.
Draw both knees down and
over to the left side.
Rotate the right shoulder
back down to the mat.
Head neutral or rotating all
the way back to your right hand.
Inhale.
Draw the knees up to the center.
And then take them
over to the left side,
allowing the lower
back to release.
If it feels comfortable,
rotating the head back
to the left side.
If it doesn't, keeping the
head in a neutral position.
Draw your knees
back to the center.
And now will come
into our Savasana,
our long deep relaxation
or Corpse Pose.
If you like to, you can
always place a bolster
underneath your knees to
release any lower back tension.
You can also place a
block underneath your feet
if you like.
Allowing the legs to rotate
out slightly from the hips.
Taking the palms up
alongside of the waist.
Allowing the eyes to fall shut.
Go ahead and make a fist
with your right hand.
Tensing all the muscles.
Inhale deeply.
Exhale.
Releasing the right hand,
the right wrist, the elbow,
the arm, the shoulder.
And then the left
hand, making a fist.
Tighten all the muscles.
Inhale.
Exhale.
Releasing the palm, the
fingers, the wrist, the elbows,
the shoulder.
Now the right foot.
Flexing the right foot.
Tensing all of the
muscles of the legs.
Inhale.
Exhale.
Soften and release.
Allowing the foot, ankle, knee,
and hip to grow warm and soft.
The left foot.
Flex all the muscles of the
foot, the leg, the thigh.
Inhale.
Exhale.
Soften and release.
And now the face.
Squeeze all the
muscles of the face.
Inhale.
Exhale.
Soften the face, the jaw,
the back of the neck.
Imagine or see or visualize
warm water or warm oil
gently cascading
onto the forehead
and flowing over the
crown of the head, down
the back of the neck,
down the back to the body.
Allow the whole body
to become very relaxed.
And then coming back to the
body, lying on the floor.
Again, resting in an
awareness of your breath.
Draw in a deeper breath and
begin to wiggle your fingers
and toes.
Rotating your wrists and ankles.
And then rub the palms
of the hands together,
and the soles of
the feet together,
balancing all the 72,000 Nabis,
or meridians, in the body.
Gently massage your
face and over the scalp.
Then from here, rolling
off onto your left side.
Placing your hands down.
Making your way up to seated.
Again, finding a
comfortable seat.
Bring your hands back to
this Vajrapradama Mudra.
Across the space of your heart.
Resting in the unshakable
trust of your heart space
knowing that you can round
back down into the spaciousness
of your heart whenever
the nervous system becomes
frazzled or fried, or when
anxiety or stress begins to
accumulate.
This place of unshakable,
unbreakable trust
is there at the
space of your heart.
And gently releasing the
fingertips down to the mat.
Rotate the palms.
Inhale.
The arms up.
Place the palms together.
Bring them to your heart
center in Anjali Mudra.
We'll chant Om
together one time.
Exhaling out completely.
Inhaling deeply to begin.
Om.
Namaste.